For a study of microbial growth, we might want to quantify absolute concentrations of cells per volume of medium. In μGrowthDB, you can find measurements like that in cells/mL or cells/μL. It's also possible to place samples of inoculum on plates and count the colonies that form over time. In that case, we'd be measuring colony-forming units (CFUs) per volume. These two kinds of measurements are incompatible, since it's impossible to say whether a single visible colony was started by a single cell.

Often, it may be enough to work with relative units like the unitless OD or numbers of rRNA reads. While these are not directly comparable with absolute abundances, they can be used to derive qualitative comparisons or quantified into absolute counts by combining with other methods.

<h2 id="plates">Plate Counts</h2>

Counting colony-forming units (CFUs) can be a cheap manual method to determine abundances. For example, we can take 1mL from the cell culture and mix it into 9mL of medium. This dilutes the culture concentration by 1:10. We can repeat this process multiple times, sampling from each dilution into another vessel for an additional 1:10 dilution every time. We can place extracts of all of these cultures onto plates and let them incubate overnight. The vessels will develop bacterial colonies and we can count them in the plates where the distribution is clearest to see. This count can then be divided by the dilution factor, so we can get a measurement of the number of CFUs per volume of the original culture.

<h2 id="od">Optical Density</h2>

Optical density (OD) is an automated mechanism of evaluating cell abundances. It requires a spectrophotometry device like a plate reader. The machine passes a beam of light through transparent wells filled with cell culture. We can measure the transmittance of light in percentages by dividing the intensity of the light transmitted through the sample (\\(I\\)) by the intensity of the light that hits the sample (\\(I_0\\)). The absorbance of the cell suspension can be derived from the decimal logarithm of the inverse of transmittance:

$$
\%T = \frac{I}{I_0} \times 100\\\\
OD  = -log_{10}(T)
$$

A higher optical density correlates with a greater cell concentration in the plate. This is not due to absorbance by the cells, but due to light scattering, proportional to their number. Since transmittance is a percentage value, OD starts at 0 for T = 100%. Transmittance of 1% corresponds to an OD of 2, and as transmittance decreases further, its correspondence to cell density decreases. If absorbance values are higher than 3, dilution of the samples is recommended to avoid inaccurate measurements.

It is important to recognize that OD is a relative measurement that depends on the optical properties of the cell suspension. We need to calibrate the plate reader's baseline by using blank samples with the exact same volume and medium composition, but no cells. We can take the difference in absorbance as our indicator of cell density. In μGrowthDB, we expect that submitted measurements are after subtraction of blanks, but be sure to read the study descriptions for details.

It is common to analyze OD values for comparison and modeling, but we could infer the true cell concentration in CFUs/mL by performing serial dilutions as described in the "Plate counts" section and preparing a standard curve mapping between samples of different concentrations and their OD.

One drawback of OD is that it measures the presence of both live and dead cells, since they both produce an optical signal. In practice, this means that growth curves generated by OD measurements will often not accurately describe the death phase of microbial growth.

<h2 id="fc">Flow Cytometry</h2>

Flow cytometry (FC) is a high-throughput measurement method that is capable of giving us concentrations of cells rather than CFUs. Cells are stained with a fluorescent dye and passed through a tube in a single-cell suspension. A laser beam excites the fluorophores and the resulting scattered light is filtered through a detection mechanism. The optical properties of the light can be recorded and used to count cells or even determine their types. Provided the cells are large enough, staining might not be necessary for detection, but it can be used to amplify the signal or to differentiate between species. Tagging different strains with different fluorescent antibodies would allow counting cells per strain directly, but it may not be practically feasible to find dyes with enough specificity. Alternatively, we could use the recorded community-level optical data to categorize cells using machine learning approaches.

Like with OD, live and dead cells will both scatter light, so they are both recorded as they pass through the detection mechanism, though we could separate them by live/dead staining. One approach is to use DNA-binding dyes that preferentially stain cells with a compromised membrane. Filtering FC data to only the cells of interest is referred to as "gating".

<h2 id="16s">16S rRNA sequencing</h2>

Counting reads from 16S rRNA sequencing can also let us group cell counts by species. We can sequence and amplify 16S ribosomal genes from the cells' DNA. Hypervariable regions allow identification by genus, or possibly by species if we use full-length 16S sequencing.

Provided we know what species we're working with, read counts need to be normalized based on how many 16S gene copy numbers we expect. This information can be found from a database like [rrnDB](https://rrndb.umms.med.umich.edu/). In μGrowthDB, it's assumed that 16S read counts are normalized, and is recommended that the specific database and its version are recorded in the study technique's description. The normalized read count proportions can be multiplied by absolute abundances as measured by some other method to give us per-strain cell counts.

Note that any reads marked as "Unknown" are not normalized. They may be external contaminants, or belong to one of the known species in the experiments, but if they're not identified, it's impossible to determine. When examining growth curves that include "Unknown" records, be warned that their counts are likely not directly comparable with the other data traces.

<h2 id="metabolite">Metabolites</h2>

In order to grow, cells need nutrients and, as they consume them, they expel other chemicals as waste products. The amounts of these metabolites over time can be a useful tool to understand microbial growth.

A common mechanism for measuring metabolite concentrations is by using chromatography, often **High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)**. High pressure pumps move a liquid solvent, a "mobile phase", through a column called a "solid phase". The sample of metabolites is injected along with the mobile phase. Different molecules interact with the material in the solid phase with a different strength. This results in metabolites moving through the column at different speeds, separating them into groups with the same physicochemical properties. A detector measures a signal for each group, allowing us to identify them. **Gas chromatography (GC)** is a similar process that can be used for chemicals that can be vaporized. In that technique, the mobile phase is not a liquid, but an inert gas and the stationary phase can be solid or liquid.

Various different detectors can be used to identify and quantify metabolites after they are grouped by passing through the column. A **mass spectrometry (MS)** device ionizes molecules and launches them through a detector that can measure their mass-to-charge ratio. **Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)** spectroscopy can determine their molecular composition based on relative movements of their carbon or hydrogen atoms in a strong magnetic field. **Ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometry (UV-Vis)** is a relatively cheap method that measures absorbance of UV light as the sample passes through the device.

Determining the concentration of a metabolite in a sample can be done based on the intensity of the signal. For each group of peaks on a UV-Vis chart, we can measure the area under the curve (AUC) of the absorbance. That value can be compared with the AUC of the same metabolite in other samples to plot its change over time or to compare biological replicates. We can also map it onto a standard curve to estimate absolute abundances.

In μGrowthDB, metabolites may be uploaded in AUC units that can only be used for relative comparisons. However, they will often be quantified in either molar concentration units (mM, μM), or mass concentration units (g/L, mg/L). Converting between the two relies on multiplying or dividing by the mass of the metabolite, which is taken from [ChEBI](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chebi/) whenever possible. If the database has no recorded average mass for a certain metabolite, we will be unable to convert between units in charts or data exports.

The database does not record the specific technique that was used to measure metabolite concentrations, but uploaders are encouraged to describe their methodology in the technique description during the upload process.
